Deep Learning for Time Series Forecasting: Tutorial and Literature Survey

KONSTANTINOS BENIDIS, SYAMA SUNDAR RANGAPURAM, and
VALENTIN FLUNKERT, Amazon Research, Germany
YUYANG WANG and DANIELLE MADDIX, Amazon Research, USA
CANER TURKMEN, JAN GASTHAUS, MICHAEL BOHLKE-SCHNEIDER,
DAVID SALINAS, LORENZO STELLA, FRANÇOIS-XAVIER AUBET, and
LAURENT CALLOT, Amazon Research
TIM JANUSCHOWSKI, Zalando SE, Germany



Deep learning based forecasting methods have become the methods of choice in many applications of time series prediction or forecasting often outperforming other approaches. Consequently, over the last years, these
methods are now ubiquitous in large-scale industrial forecasting applications and have consistently ranked
among the best entries in forecasting competitions (e.g., M4 and M5). This practical success has further increased the academic interest to understand and improve deep forecasting methods. In this article we provide
an introduction and overview of the field: We present important building blocks for deep forecasting in some
depth; using these building blocks, we then survey the breadth of the recent deep forecasting literature.





1 INTRODUCTION
Forecasting is the task of extrapolating time series into the future. It has many important applications [54] such as forecasting the demand for items sold by retailers [15, 25, 41, 136, 156, 190],
the flow of traffic [111, 118, 126], the demand and supply of energy [45, 117, 157, 170], or the covariance matrix, volatility and long-tail distributions in finance [12, 29, 30, 124, 197]. As such, it
is a well-studied area (e.g., see [84] for an introduction) with its own dedicated research community. The machine learning, data science, systems, and operations research communities as well
as application-specific research communities have also studied the problem intensively (e.g., see
a series of recent tutorials [55–58]). In contrast to traditional forecasting applications, modern
incarnations often exhibit large panels of related time series, all of which need to be forecasted simultaneously [91]. Although these problem characteristics make them amenable to deep learning
or neural networks (NNs), as in many other domains over the course of history, NNs were not
always a standard tool to tackle such problems. Indeed, their effectiveness has historically been
regarded as mixed (e.g., [201]).
The history of NNs starts in 1957 [152] and in 1964 for NNs in forecasting [83]. Since then, interest in NNs has oscillated, with upsurges in attention attributable to breakthroughs. The application
of NNs in time series forecasting has followed the general popularity, typically with a lag of a few
years. Examples of such breakthroughs include Rumelhart et al. [153, 154] that popularized the
training of multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) using back-propagation. Significant advances were
made subsequently such as the use of convolutional NNs (CNNs) [113], and Long Short Term
Memory (LSTM) [81] cells that address the issue of recurrent NNs’ (RNNs) training, just to
name a few. Despite these advances, NNs remained hard to train and difficult to work with. Methods such as Support Vector Machines (SVMs) [26] and Random Forests [79] that were developed
in the 1990s proved to be highly effective (LeCun et al. [115] found that SVMs were as good as the
best-designed NNs available at the time) and were supported by attractive theory. This shifted the
interest of researchers away from NNs. Forecasting was no exception and results obtained with
NNs were mostly mixed as reflected in a highly cited review [201]. The breakthrough that marked
the dawn of the deep learning era came in 2006 when Hinton et al. [78] showed that it was possible to train NNs with a large number of layers (deep) if the weights are initialized appropriately.
Accordingly, deep learning has had a sizable impact on forecasting [110] and NNs have long entered the canon of standard techniques for forecasting [84]. New models specifically designed for
forecasting tasks have been proposed, taking advantage of deep learning to supercharge classical
forecasting models or to develop entirely novel approaches. This recent burst of attention on deep
forecasting models is the latest twist in a long and rich history.




